Building a Start-to-End Model of the CESR Injector Linac
Ryland Goldman,1, 2 Adam Bartnik,1 and Jared Maxson1
1

Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-Based Sciences and Education, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
2
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA
(Dated: August 6, 2026)

The CESR injector linac supplies positrons to the Cornell Electron Storage Ring in six stages:
a thermionic cathode, a 150 kV DC gun, a prebuncher, four electron linac sections, a tungsten
positron converter, and four positron linacs. We present a start-to-end model of the full chain, built
in Python from open-source codes. WarpX is used for the space-charge-dominated cathode, gun,
prebuncher, and electron linacs, Geant4 for positron production, and Impact-T for the positron
linacs. The beam reaches the converter at 146 MeV and the recaptured positrons are accelerated
to ∼250 MeV. Stage configurations are written in YAML to allow algorithmic adjustment by Xopt
for ML optimization.

arXiv:2608.05094v1 [physics.acc-ph] 5 Aug 2026

I.

INTRODUCTION

The Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR) is a
768 meter positron ring at Cornell University. Originally used for high-energy electron-positron collisions, it
now powers the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source
(CHESS) [1]. Positrons are produced for the synchrotron
using a six-stage linac outlined in Fig. 1.
Electrons are emitted in a 2 ns pulse from a thermionic
cathode and accelerated electrostatically up to 150 keV.
They then undergo bunching in two low-frequency RF
cavities, are accelerated up to 150 MeV, and impact a
tungsten target. This target produces an electromagnetic
shower which includes positrons that are collimated and
reaccelerated to around 250 MeV.
An operational chain currently exists as LinacSim using General Particle Tracer and written in 2013 [2, 3].
Several attempts have been made to modernize the code
through BMAD, however the input files are difficult to
parse [4]. This work presents a version of the simulation
using Python with three actively maintained open-source
programs, WarpX, Geant4, and Impact-T [5–7].
A possible use of the updated code is for AI optimization of the operating parameters. The program allows
for Xopt to run a constrained non-dominated genetic
sorting algorithm (CNSGA) [8]. It is single-threaded to
minimize memory latency and data transfer overhead,
however multithreading could be implemented relatively
easily.

II.

METHODS

The electron portion is built using the WarpX particlein-cell code using 2D azimuthally symmetric geometry.
Space charge is enabled in the cathode, gun, prebuncher,
and first linac using the electromagnetostatic solver, as
GPT and other relativistic solvers approximate the calculation with electrostatics in the bunch rest frame (a
poor approximation when the energy spread is high, as
shown in Fig. 2). After the first linac, the mean kinetic
energy is assumed to be high enough (⟨KE⟩ = 31.5 MeV)

such that the space charge effects can be ignored, since
they are suppressed by a factor of 1/γ 2 .
The positron conversion process is simulated with
Geant4 using the QGSP_BERT_EMZ physics list [6]. To allow for better integration with the other beam components, the G4beamline wrapper is used [9]. This output
is fed into Impact-T for the final positron acceleration.
No new fieldmaps were created in this work. Existing
models created in Poisson Superfish [10] were used for the
prebuncher and first linac section (based on the SLAC
linac), however neither fieldmaps nor CAD models were
available for the other linac sections. These other sections
reused the first SLAC fieldmap, which is nonphysical but
provides a good approximation. The positron capture
optics also used previously generated BMAD fieldmaps
found on CLASSE fileservers, which likely derive from
earlier work on this injector [11].
For ease of use, particle data is exchanged via the
openPMD standard [12], fieldmaps are converted to
HDF5 files, and configuration data is stored in YAML
to be easily edited both by humans and computers. The
particle count is upsampled to 50,000 after each stage
due to beam losses throughout the linac.

III.

CATHODE AND GUN

Electrons at CESR are created via thermionic emission from a 1425 K tungsten cathode and are accelerated
via an electrostatic gun known as the Cornell High Intensity Linac Injector (CHILI) which operates at 150 kV
DC [13]. The emission is controlled by a grid bias which
is pulsed for 2 ns to release the electrons [14]. Computation for this stage is split into the emission calculation,
which determines the initial particle distribution, and the
electrostatic acceleration through the gun.

A.

Cathode Theory

In a simplified version of the cathode, the system can
be reduced to one dimension, as the diameter of the cath-

2

Cathode

Gun

Prebuncher

Linacs 1–4

Target

Linacs 5–8

Thermionic electron
emission (2 ns)

Electrostatic acceleration to 150 keV

Longitudinal
beam compression

RF acceleration of electrons
to ∼100 MeV

Positron production by collision
w/ tungsten

RF acceleration of positrons
to ∼200 MeV

FIG. 1: The six stages of the CESR injector linac.

latter, the field due to the i’th charge in this region is [2]:
(
zi σi
σi /ϵ0 left of the sheet,
Ei = −
+
(1)
d ϵ0
0
right of the sheet,
where zi and σi are the position and charge density of
sheet i, and d is the electrode separation. With the sheets
sorted in order of increasing z, the total field acting on
the n’th sheet due to all the others is
Etotal,n =
FIG. 2: Transverse space-charge force error of GPT’s
rest-frame electrostatic mesh solver
(spacecharge3Dmesh) and WarpX’s
electromagnetostatic solver versus bunch energy spread,
measured against GPT’s full N -body solver
(spacecharge3D).

Mesh, V = V0

16 mm

e−
e−
e−
e−

e− − e−
e
e−
e−

e−
e−
e−

e−
e−
e−
e−

e−

e−

e−
e−

Applied field Ea
Field from charges
FIG. 3: Schematic of the gridded thermionic cathode.
Electrons emitted from the tungsten cathode are pulled
across the 200 µm gap by a voltage V0 from the mesh.
The space-charge field of the electrons opposes the field,
limiting the current density to the Child–Langmuir
value JCL .

ode is much greater than the cathode-grid separation
2R ≫ d. We consider the charges as infinitely wide sheets
of charge density, each producing a uniform electric field,
between two electrodes at a potential difference, as seen
in Fig. 3. The total field in the region can be written as
the superposition of a linearly increasing field from the
potential difference, plus the field that the charged sheets
would make if both conductors were grounded. For the

N
X

EiL ,

(2)

i=n+1

where EiL and EiR denote Eq. 1 evaluated to the left and
right of sheet i. Splitting each term into its background
and sheet parts, this can be rewritten as
N
X

EiBG +

i=1

d = 200 µm

EiR +

i=1

Etotal,n =

Cathode, V = 0

n−1
X

N
X

EiS − EnBG −

i=1

EiS =

σi
,
ϵ0

EiBG = −

n
X

EiS ,

(3)

i=1

zi σi
,
d ϵ0

(4)

which yields the net longitudinal force on a sheet in that
region.
As the charge from the previously-emitted sheets increases, it counters the applied voltage and the electric
field immediately at the surface of the cathode drops. In
steady-state, the self-limiting space charge emission follows the Child–Langmuir law [15, 16]:
r
3/2
4ϵ0 2e V0
JCL =
.
(5)
9
me d2
B.

Gun Fieldmap

The fieldmap for the CHILI gun was created prior to
this work using scans from the engineering drawings in
Fig. 4 [2, 17]. A cylindrically symmetric cathode and
anode structure was used to build the model in Superfish,
while a small region was interpolated and exported as the
2D fieldmap.
C.

Implementation

For the emission phase, electrons are injected at twice
the maximum Child–Langmuir limit. WarpX allows for

3

(a)

FIG. 4: Left, drawing 6051-022 of CHILI gun [17]; right,
generated 2D fieldmap exported to WarpX
(equipotentials shown).

a flux source, so particles are continuously emitted from
the cathode at this rate. Space charge organically reduces the current density back to JCL to obtain the true
distribution as seen in Fig. 5. The WarpX simulation is
modeled in 2D instead of the sheet approximation.

(b)

FIG. 6: (a) Kinetic energy gain of the electron bunch
through the 150 kV CHILI electrostatic gun. (b)
Longitudinal phase space of the bunch at the gun exit.

FIG. 5: Over-injection of current at the cathode,
reduced to the Child–Langmuir limit by space charge
forces in WarpX. The analytic calculation is shown as
the black dashed line, which grows as the grid voltage is
increased over the 2 ns pulse.

push to slow down and later electrons are kicked forwards.

The delivered flux is accelerated through the CHILI
gun. As the gun field is nonuniform, most acceleration
occurs in the first 50 mm, noted in Fig. 6a. The longitudinal phase space of the bunch at the gun exit is shown
in Fig. 6b.

Both prebunchers share the same cavity design
(though with different loaded quality factors), with the
second installed in reverse. The cavities were modeled prior to this work in CST Microwave Studio with
cylindrical symmetry [2]. The cavity model and its
fundamental-mode electric field are shown in Fig. 7, and
the calculated mode frequencies are compared with measurements in Table I.
The configuration file specifies the power and relative
phase of each cavity, while the field amplitude is derived from physically-measured loaded quality factors:
Q = 3000 for prebuncher 1 and Q = 4300 for prebuncher 2 [18]. The prebunchers operate at 18 times the
master oscillator frequency, referenced to the 1991 measurement of the CESR RF frequency (which is 42 times

IV.

PREBUNCHER

The prebuncher consists of two rf cavities enclosed in
solenoids, with the intent to compress the emitted electrons longitudinally for better capture in the downstream
acceleration rf cavities. The bulk arrives at the zero
crossing (90◦ off crest), while earlier electrons receive a

A.

Prebuncher Fieldmaps

4

FIG. 7: Microwave Studio model of the prebuncher
cavity and its fundamental-mode electric field.
TABLE I: Calculated and measured mode frequencies of
the prebuncher cavity.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5

fcalc (MHz)
215
577
614
802
834

fmeas (MHz)
214
580
643
814
843

the master oscillator) of 499.7645 MHz [19].
The fieldmap is normalized to a stored energy of
Usim = 1 J, and the field amplitude is scaled by
r
U
QL P
,
(6)
A=
,
U=
Usim
2πf

FIG. 8: Simulation results for lens 0A, plotted as
distance down the beam pipe (vertical) vs. radius
(horizontal).

C.

Implementation

The beam enters the prebuncher as a 1.29 nC, 2 ns
pulse with an rms length of σz = 109 mm and mean
kinetic energy of 148.5 keV. As the prebuncher cavities
are set to the zero crossing, the energy change is small
(142 keV at exit). Fig. 9 shows the full beam evolution
along the section, with σz decreasing to 27.5 mm after
compression.

where P is the dissipated power and f is the operating
frequency.
B.

Solenoids

The five lenses (lens 0A to 0E) and two longer solenoids
(solenoid 0 and 1) were also modeled in Poisson Superfish using their schematics, including a nearby steel
frame. Figure 8 shows an example simulation result for
one solenoid and lens. Due to the large magnetic permeability of steel, the field lines are drawn into the frame.
The sources of the field are modeled as small rectangular
regions of uniform current density, with total enclosed
current equal to
Ienclosed = (# of windings) × (1 A) .

(7)

Each solenoid is simulated in Superfish with 1 A of input current, and the fieldmap is scaled linearly to the
operating current.
The physical injector contains cylindrically symmetric
annular end plates with four equally spaced support bars.
In the Superfish model, complete cylindrical symmetry is
used as an approximation. This makes the model simpler
and is not expected to add a significant error to the field
inside of the pipe.

FIG. 9: Left, bunch length σz along the prebuncher,
with the two cavity gaps marked by vertical lines.
Right, peak current and mean kinetic energy.
Since the 2 ns pulse is a large fraction of the 214 MHz
RF period, the energy change applied by the zero crossing
is not linear. As the bunch travels through the cavities,
it produces the longitudinal phase space shown in Fig. 10
rather than a point.

V.

AUTOPHASING

For both the prebuncher and linac sections, the rf
cavity configurations from the input files are specified
as relative phases which are dependent on the on crest

5

FIG. 11: RK4 phase scan to find on-crest phase, which
is then applied to the YAML configuration.

A.

FIG. 10: Longitudinal phase space at four stations
along the prebuncher section: entrance, after the first
cavity, after the second cavity, and at the 2.03 m
handoff. The sinusoidal chirp folds the distribution.

phase. This phase depends on the exact arrival time of
the bunch, which can change based on the other machine
settings. Therefore, during each simulation run with different parameters, the on crest phase must be rederived.
To find the crest, a sample of particles is loaded alongside the fieldmap, then the phase search is conducted
using RK4 integration. This method approximately captures the energy gain without need to run the full PIC
simulation. As a result, the on-crest phase can be located
in a few seconds.
Coarse evaluations are first conducted in 4◦ increments
with 512 particles to build the scan shown in Fig. 11, and
then a finer evaluation is conducted in a smaller range
with 2048 particles and 0.1◦ increments to narrow in on
the on-crest phase. This is automatically saved in the
configuration YAML file as CREST_PHASE_DEG, which is
then added to the offset PHASE_DEG.

VI.

ELECTRON LINACS

Before the positron converter, electrons are accelerated to roughly 150 MeV using four linacs. Section 1
is an exact copy of the 86-cell cavity from the two-mile
SLAC accelerator. Sections 2 and 3 are 90-cell cavities
from the Cambridge Electron Accelerator (CEA), and
section 4 was taken from the 1966 Cornell University
Linac (CU) [20].

Fieldmaps

Since Section 1 is the same design from the SLAC accelerator, there is a large body of information available
with specifications and simulations [21].
The 3-dimensional, 86-cell cavity is too large to simulate on a typical PC with Microwave Studio, so Poisson Superfish was used instead. However, the simulation
failed because Superfish is not a true eigenmode solver.
Superfish internally varies the RF frequency and searches
for frequencies that have a resonance. It can find normal
modes, but it can easily get confused in many-cell cavity
calculations with closely spaced modes. The computed
field would have approximately the right appearance and
symmetry, but with some obvious problems. The solution would depend strongly on the location of the field
source, which should not matter.
Instead, we refer to a method found to model these
cavities in the 1980s [22, 23]. Each cell of the cavity is
modeled separately, assuming perfect periodic boundary
conditions. Then, the fields are stitched together, respecting the phase advance of the wave. To respect the
symmetry of the cavity, 1.5 cells are modeled because
the cavity is a 2π
3 traveling wave cavity. Superfish gives
a standing wave solution, which is then sampled to produce a right-going traveling wave solution. We require a
constant gradient cavity to produce the boundary conditions for matching cells.
Fieldmaps are not available for the CEA and CU linacs,
however they can be inserted into the current code once
produced. For now, sections 2–4 use the SLAC fieldmap
which is rescaled to the appropriate gradient. This approximation must be fixed before further use. For example, the 5-meter CU linac is rescaled to a higher gradient because the SLAC linac is only 3 meters, as seen in
Fig. 12.

6
VII.

POSITRON CONVERTER

The positrons are produced by a 6.35 mm tungsten
target [24]. Electrons scatter off the tungsten nuclei and
radiate Bremsstrahlung photons, which pair produce and
create an electromagnetic shower. The positrons from
the shower are captured by a solenoid which collimates
the beam.

FIG. 12: Kinetic energy distribution of electrons
through linacs 1 to 4. Blue line represents mean energy.

B.

Implementation

Each section is run as an independent WarpX simulation. Space charge is enabled only in section 1, where
the beam is still at 150 keV; in sections 2–4 the 1/γ 2 suppression at ⟨KE⟩ ≥ 35 MeV makes the self-field negligible
and it is disabled for computation efficiency.
The traveling wave is produced from the two Superfish fieldmaps which are loaded as separate applied fields
driven at a phase offset of π2 . The phase is referenced to
the arrival time of the bunch at the cavity entrance using
the autophase method discussed in Section V.
Figure 12 shows the energy spread increasing in Section 1, then remaining roughly constant through the remaining linacs. The full output distribution at the end
of Section 4 is given in Fig. 13.

FIG. 14: Positron radial divergence at production (the
target back face) and after focusing (the section 5
entrance flange, 129 mm downstream). Divergence is
invariant under a field-free drift, so the narrowing
between the two is the capture solenoid at work.

A.

Optics

Figure 14 shows the initial high divergence of the postshower positrons. These positrons are collimated using
a short 0.7022 T solenoid [11]. This solenoid decreases
the angular divergence from a median of 478 mrad to
361 mrad.

B.

FIG. 13: Output kinetic energy distribution from
Section 4 of the electron linac. This is a distribution of
the particles that are received by the converter.

Implementation

The section 4 exit beam from WarpX is upsampled to
50,000 macroparticles, similarly to the other stages, and
written as a G4beamline ASCII file with each macroparticle corresponding to an “event.” By tracking each event
ID, output positrons are mapped back to the electron
that produced them to account for charge.
The incident 59.3 pC electron beam, with an average
kinetic energy of 145.7 MeV, gives a yield of 0.386 e+ /e−
(as well as 1.04 e− /e− and 11.2 γ/e− ). The 22.9 pC
of positrons have a large energy spread with a mean of
17.1 MeV.

7
VIII.

POSITRON LINACS

The positrons are reaccelerated by four additional cavities: two CEA and two CU linacs. These are modeled
in Impact-T rather than WarpX.

A.

Optimization

The simulation software includes the possibility for
genetic optimization using the CNSGA algorithm in
Xopt [8]. As every stage reads settings from YAML, the

As discussed previously, the post-converter positrons
have a much higher energy spread and angular divergence compared to the initial electron beam, so the first
two sections are enclosed in 0.243 T capture solenoids.
Several quadrupole magnets also exist, primarily in sections 6–8.

FIG. 16: Amount of charge in each segment of the
simulation. Only a small fraction survives to the end.

FIG. 15: Kinetic energy distribution of positrons
through linacs 5 to 8, with section entrances marked.
Blue line represents mean energy.

The energy spread remains high throughout the linac,
shown in Fig. 15. The core of the beam is accelerated to
approximately 250 MeV.

IX.

DISCUSSION

Figure 16 tracks the amount of charge which survives
to the end of the simulation. Of the 1.36 nC emitted
at the cathode, 0.37 pC reaches the end of section 8.
The largest loss comes from after the positron converter,
mostly due to a) hitting the wall as a result of the large
angular divergence, and b) incorrect phasing as a result
of the large energy spread. Only about 1.6% of positrons
survive the linacs 5–8, in agreement with previous simulations [25].
As mentioned before, sections 2–8 reuse the SLAC
fieldmap, which sets the right energy gain but are otherwise inaccurate. Future fieldmaps must be built to ensure
simulation accuracy, though this will potentially require
additional measurements of the existing hardware.

optimizer can adjust the configuration without editing
code. It varies 23 parameters across the chain to maximize transmitted charge while minimizing emittance, energy spread, and spot size at the exit.
Each evaluation runs in an isolated sandbox and takes
roughly 40 minutes single-threaded on a consumer laptop, so evaluations can be run in parallel on single-core
jobs on the CLASSE cluster. Only exploratory runs have
been performed so far due to time constraints.

B.

Further Studies

Previous research has looked into the potential for using rf cavities to increase the yield of linac-based slow
positron sources [26]. Future work will use this software
to examine the possibility of using the CESR injector for
producing slow positrons, as the hardware is currently in
place. However, this would require rephasing the cavities to be off-crest in order to decelerate the positrons for
moderation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the U.S. National Science
Foundation under Award PHY-1549132, the Center for
Bright Beams, as well as the NSF Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) program.
Special thanks to previous simulations of the CESR
injector linac. Prior iterations of this software were
developed by Adam Bartnik, Jim Shanks, Alexandria
Udenkwo, Dan Fromowitz, Kirsten Deitrick, and others.

8

[1] J. Shanks, J. Barley, S. Barrett, M. Billing, G. Codner,
Y. Li, X. Liu, A. Lyndaker, D. Rice, N. Rider, D. L.
Rubin, A. Temnykh, and S. T. Wang, Accelerator design
for the Cornell high energy synchrotron source upgrade,
Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 22, 021602 (2019).
[2] A. C. Bartnik, LinacSim details, CESR Wiki, Cornell
Laboratory for Accelerator-based Sciences and Education (CLASSE) (2013).
[3] S. B. van der Geer and M. J. de Loos, General particle
tracer: A new 3d code for accelerator and beamline design, in Proceedings of the 5th European Particle Accelerator Conference (EPAC’96) (Sitges, Spain, 1996) pp.
1241–1243.
[4] D. Sagan, Bmad: A relativistic charged particle simulation library, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A 558, 356 (2006).
[5] J.-L. Vay, D. P. Grote, R. Lehe, H.-S. Chang, et al.,
Warpx: A new exascale computing platform for beam–
plasma simulations, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section A 909, 476 (2018).
[6] S. Agostinelli et al., Geant4—a simulation toolkit, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A 506, 250 (2003).
[7] J. Qiang, R. D. Ryne, S. Habib, and V. Decyk, An objectoriented parallel particle-in-cell code for beam dynamics
simulation in linear accelerators, Journal of Computational Physics 163, 434 (2000).
[8] C. E. Mayes et al., Xopt: A generator for autonomous
experimentation and black-box optimization, Journal of
Open Source Software 9, 5993 (2024).
[9] T. Roberts, G4beamline particle tracking in matterdominated beam lines, AIP Conference Proceedings
1099, 440 (2009).
[10] J. H. Billen and L. M. Young, POISSON SUPERFISH
(2004).
[11] D. B. Fromowitz, Increasing the Positron Capture Efficiency of the CESR Linac Injector, Ph.D. thesis, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York (2000).
[12] A. Huebl, R. Lehe, R. Pausch, et al., openpmd: A meta
data standard for particle and mesh-based data, Computer Physics Communications 294, 108908 (2024).
[13] E. B. Blum, M. G. Billing, C. R. Dunnam, R. M. Littauer, B. D. McDaniel, D. H. Rice, L. E. Sakazaki, and
R. H. Siemann, Performance of the Cornell high intensity
linac injector, in Proceedings of the 12th International

Conference on High-Energy Accelerators (Batavia, Illinois, 1983) pp. 262–264.
[14] M. Billing, Linac injector, Internal note, Laboratory
of Nuclear Studies, Cornell University (2000), dated 6
November 2000.
[15] C. D. Child, Discharge from hot CaO, Phys. Rev. (Series
I) 32, 492 (1911).
[16] I. Langmuir, The effect of space charge and residual gases
on thermionic currents in high vacuum, Phys. Rev. 2, 450
(1913).
[17] Cornell Laboratory for Elementary-Particle Physics,
CHILI gun MkII assembly, Engineering drawing 6051022 rev. B, sheet 1, Floyd R. Newman Laboratory, Cornell University (2009).
[18] V. Kazacha, Calibration of the prebuncher cavity accelerating voltages, CBN 94-2, Laboratory of Nuclear Studies,
Cornell University (1994).
[19] M. Giannella and J. Barley, RF numerology, CESR operations document, Cornell Laboratory for Acceleratorbased Sciences and Education (CLASSE) (1992).
[20] G. Codner, CESR Linac current configuration and history, CESR Wiki, Cornell Laboratory for Acceleratorbased Sciences and Education (CLASSE) (2022).
[21] R. B. Neal, D. W. Dupen, H. A. Hogg, and G. A. Loew,
The Stanford Two-Mile Accelerator, edited by R. B. Neal
(W. A. Benjamin, Inc., New York, 1968).
[22] J. W. Wang and G. A. Loew, Measurements of Ultimate
Accelerating Gradients in the SLAC Disk-Loaded Structure (Part I), Tech. Rep. SLAC/AP-26 (Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center, Stanford University, 1985).
[23] G. A. Loew, R. H. Miller, R. A. Early, and K. L. Bane,
Computer calculations of traveling-wave periodic structure properties, in Proceedings of the 1979 Particle Accelerator Conference (San Francisco, California, 1979).
[24] A. Mikhailichenko, CESR’s positron source, Presented at
the SLAC Linear Collider Workshop (LC02), Stanford,
California, 5 February 2002 (2015), arXiv:1505.01406,
arXiv:1505.01406 [physics.acc-ph].
[25] A. Udenkwo, Modeling the cornell electron storage ring’s
linear accelerator, CLASSE REU Report (2019).
[26] S. Crisp, R. Goldman, A. Ismail, and S. Gessner, Startto-end simulations of a compact, linac-based positron
source, in Proc. 6th North American Particle Accelerator Conference (NAPAC2025) (Sacramento, California,
2025) pp. 862–865.

